:sparkles: Apply PodSecurityStandard in Secure Cluster Class (#6390)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.md

</aside>

> ## Limitations of ClusterClass with patches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## JSON patches tips
```

> JSON patches are limited by the specification [RFC6902] in not being able to add values to not-existing targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON patches specification [RFC6902] requires that the target of
add operation must exist.
```

> The topology controller which applies the patches will return an error if a patch specified in 
> a ClusterClass matches all of the following conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence ClusterClass authors should pay special attention when the following conditions apply in order to prevent errors when a patch is applied:
```

* the patch is a JSON patch
* the patch tries to `add` a value to a **slice**
* the slice was defined with `omitempty`

> * the slice is currently does not exist

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the slice currently does not exist
```

> A workaround in this particular case is to create the slice in the patch instead of adding to the not existing one.

Reviewer 2: should this be`... instead of adding it to the non-existing one` ?

</aside>

## JSON patches tips & tricks

JSON patches specification [RFC6902] requires that the target of
add operation must exist.

As a consequence ClusterClass authors should pay special attention when the following
conditions apply in order to prevent errors when a patch is applied:

> * the patch is a JSON patch

Reviewer 3: nit: I think this first point might be confusing as today we can only write JSON patches in the ClusterClass.

Future external Patches are another topic, but this document focuses a lot on writing inline paches

Author: The whole paragraph now is about JSON patches so this point should not be necessary. I removed it

> * the patch tries to `add` a value to a **slice**

Reviewer 3: nit: we're mixing Go and JSON here a bit

Up to you but maybe there's a way to make it clearer when we are talking about the slice in an API type and when we are talking about an array in JSON

But maybe it's easier for users if we don't highlight that difference

Author: I agree, I changed to using the RFC wording `array` and added at this occurence: `(which is a **slice** in the corresponding go struct)`

This patch targets to add a file to the `files` slice of a `KubeadmConfigTemplate` which has [omitempty](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/bootstrap/kubeadm/api/v1beta1/kubeadmconfig_types.go#L54) set.

{{#tabs name:"tab-configuration-patches" tabs:"Add to existing slice,Create slice"}}
{{#tab Add to existing slice}}

This patch **requires** the key `.spec.template.spec.files` to exist to succeed.

```yaml
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterClass
metadata:
  name: my-clusterclass
spec:
  ...
  patches:
  - name: add file
    definitions:
    - selector:
        apiVersion: bootstrap.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
        kind: KubeadmConfigTemplate
      jsonPatches:
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/files/-
        value:
          content: Some content.
          path: /some/file
---
apiVersion: bootstrap.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeadmConfigTemplate
metadata:
  name: "quick-start-default-worker-bootstraptemplate"
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      ...
      files:
      - content: Some other content
        path: /some/other/file
```

{{#/tab }}
{{#tab Create slice}}

> This patch would **overwrite** an existing slice at `.spec.template.spec.files`.

Reviewer 3: I think it would fail because the JSON patch lib would detect that it can't add an already existing array (only with op: replace it would overwrite it)

Author: The library used in clusterclass for JSON patching would overwrite it.

```
apiVersion: bootstrap.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeadmConfigTemplate
spec:
  templates:
    spec:
      files:
      - content: Old
        path: /some
```

And the patch below it would result in
```
apiVersion: bootstrap.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: KubeadmConfigTemplate
spec:
  templates:
    spec:
      files:
      - content: Some content.
        path: /some/file
```

I will verify that again tomorrow.

I agree with you, normally it should be invalid, e.g. https://json-schema-validator.herokuapp.com/jsonpatch.jsp would throw an error.

Reviewer 3: Wow, I thought I remembered having that error. But it's absolutely possible that I'm wrong.

Just one fyi in case that's somehow relevant. I think during some version bump the jsonpatch lib (https://github.com/evanphx/json-patch) got more strict. I think it was from 4 to 5.

Author: I'm pretty sure I had been on main at the time of testing. But I will verify that.

Author: Ah, its the library which actually allows it https://go.dev/play/p/bT8wcbh7BSQ

Reviewer 3: Okay then you're right :). Maybe it was the old version which was more strict
